MAHARASHTRA CONTROL OF ORGANISED CRIME ACT, 1999
(Maharashtra Act No. XXX of 1999)
[As originally enacted on 24th February 1999]

An Act to make special provisions for prevention and control of, and for coping with, criminal activity by organised crime syndicate or gang, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.
(1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 1999.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Maharashtra.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(4) It shall apply also to the scheduled offences committed in any other State if such offences have been committed in furtherance of the objective of an organised crime syndicate which operates in the State of Maharashtra.

Section 2. Definitions.
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(d) "continuing unlawful activity" means an activity prohibited by law for the time being in force, which is a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment of three years or more, undertaken either singly or jointly, as a member of an organised crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate in respect of which more than one charge-sheet has been filed before a competent Court within the preceding period of ten years, and that Court has taken cognizance of such offence;
(e) "organised crime" means any continuing unlawful activity by an individual, singly or jointly, either as a member of an organised crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate, by use of violence or threat of violence or intimidation or coercion, or other unlawful means, with the objective of gaining pecuniary benefits, or gaining undue economic or other advantage for himself or any other person or promoting insurgency;
(f) "organised crime syndicate" means a group of two or more persons who, acting either singly or collectively, as a syndicate or gang indulge in activities of organised crime.

CHAPTER II - OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

Section 3. Punishment for organised crime.
(1) Whoever commits an offence of organised crime shall—
(i) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to a fine, subject to a minimum fine of rupees one lakh;
(ii) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to a fine, subject to a minimum fine of rupees five lakh.
(2) Whoever conspires or attempts to commit or advocates, abets or knowingly facilitates the commission of an offence of organised crime shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to a fine, subject to a minimum fine of rupees five lakh.
(3) Whoever harbours or conceals or attempts to harbour or conceal any member of an organised crime syndicate shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to a fine, subject to a minimum fine of rupees five lakh.

CHAPTER IV - DESIGNATED COURTS

Section 9. Trial of offences by Special Courts.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, all offences under this Act shall be triable only by the Special Court constituted under this Act.
(2) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish one or more Special Courts for the trial of offences under this Act.

Section 16. Modified application of certain provisions of CrPC.
No person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall be released on bail or on his own bond unless—
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release; and
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.

CHAPTER V - EVIDENCE

Section 18. Certain confessions made to police officers to be taken into consideration.
Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, but subject to the provisions of this section, a confession made by a person before a police officer not lower in rank than the Superintendent of Police and recorded by such police officer either in writing or on any mechanical device like cassettes, tapes or sound tracks from out of which sounds or images can be reproduced, shall be admissible in the trial of such person for an offence under this Act.
